## Supplementary Methods

BioCypher is implemented as a Python package.
Its structure follows the purpose of a threefold modularity of inputs, ontology, and outputs.
A user interface class (“core”) receives user choices via configuration YAML files and connects the inputs provided by resource-specific adapters to either bulk disk-writing methods or driver-based connections tailor-made for database management systems.
It also manages the mapping of data inputs to ontologies with the help of an ontology module.
This modular architecture facilitates extension of all modules according to the community’s needs.

The resulting knowledge graphs (KGs) can be described as “instance-based” realisations of biomedical concepts: using the concept definition from the ontology, each entity in the graph becomes an instance of this concept.
We recommend the use of a generic “high-level” ontology such as the Biolink model 1, a comprehensive and generic biomedical ontology; where needed, this ontology can be exchanged with or extended by more specific and task-directed ontologies, for instance from the OBO Foundry 2.
The versions of all used ontologies should be specified by each pipeline, which can most effectively be realised by specifying a persistent URL (PURL) for the versioned ontology file (most commonly in OWL format) in the BioCypher configuration.
Identifier namespaces are collected from the community-curated and frequently updated Bioregistry service 3, which is important for ensuring continued compatibility among the created KGs.
Bioregistry also supplies convenient methods for parsing identifier Compact URIs (CURIEs), which are the preferred method of unambiguously specifying identities of KG entities.
For identifier mapping, where required, the corresponding facilities of pypath 4 are used and extended.

The preferred way of entering data into a BioCypher graph attaches scientific provenance to each entry, allowing the aggregation of data with respect to their sources (for instance, the publication an interaction was derived from) and thus avoiding problems such as duplicate counting of the same primary data from different secondary curations.
For author attribution, the preferred way of entering data into BioCypher also includes the exact provenance of each entry.
In the same way, all licences of the contents are propagated forward, enabling the users of the framework to easily determine the allowed uses for any given KG.
This behaviour can be enforced by using BioCypher’s “strict mode.” The attachment of this information can be particularly useful in cases in which a subset of the graph does not fulfil the user’s requirements; individual entity annotation allows the usage of only the parts of the KG that are covered by the rights of the user.
While the ultimate responsibility of correct interpretation and execution of licensing issues lies with the end user, we strive to make the task as accessible as possible.

BioCypher is a free software under MIT licence, openly developed and available at https://github.com/biocypher and via PyPI.
We are generally compatible with the three most recent Python versions (which currently is 3.9 or higher).
Community contributions in the form of GitHub issues or pull requests are very welcome and encouraged.
More details and a tutorial can be found in the documentation at https://biocypher.org.
