## Supplementary Note 1 - Background

We here give some background and references on the problem of standardising biomedical knowledge representation.
Biomedical knowledge, although increasingly abundant, is fragmented across hundreds of resources.
For instance, a clinical researcher may use protein information from UniProtKB 5, genetic variants from COSMIC 6, protein interactions from IntAct 7, and information on clinical trials from ClinicalTrials.gov 8.


Finding the most suitable KG for a specific task is challenging and time-consuming; they are published in isolation and there is no registry 9,10.
Few available KG solutions perfectly fit the task the individual researcher wants to perform, but creating custom KGs is only possible for those that can afford years of development time by an individual 11,12 or even entire teams 13.
Smaller or non-bioinformatics labs need to choose from publicly available KGs, limiting customisation and the use of non-public data.
There exist frameworks to build certain kinds of KG from scratch 14,15, but these are difficult to use for researchers outside of the ontology subfield and often have a rigid underlying data model 10,16.
Even task-specific knowledge graphs sometimes need to be built locally by the user due to licensing or maintenance reasons, which requires significant technical expertise 17.
Modifying an existing, comprehensive KG for a specific purpose is a non-trivial and often manual process prone to lack of reproducibility 18.
