## Supplementary Note 2 - Approach

We expand here on our section in the main text, detailing the four pillars of our approach.

1) Modularity: To rationalise efforts across the community, we propose a flexible modular architecture that maximises reuse of data and code in three ways: input, ontology, and output.
Input adapters allow delegating maintenance work to one central place for each resource, ontology adapters give access to the wealth of structured information curated by the ontology community, and output adapters allow benchmarking and selection of database management systems.
Together, these mechanisms shall enable an agile workflow that drastically reduces the time and effort to develop and deploy custom KGs for small teams.
See the case study “Modularity” and others for more information.

2) Harmonisation: To facilitate harmonisation of datasets from a biological perspective, we propose to use ontology mapping (referring to a hierarchical organisation of biological concepts).
Primary data sources may represent similar data in different ways.
BioCypher harmonises biomedical data by mapping divergent representations onto the same biological concept, and aids with the technical aspects of ontology manipulation (see case study “Tumour board”).
In addition, the ontological information projected onto each KG entity allows for more flexible and informative queries in downstream analyses (see case study “Network expansion”).

3) Reproducibility: By sharing the ontology mapping from (2) in a project-specific manner, a database used for a specific task can be reproduced more effectively.
Since sharing the databases themselves is often prohibited by their large size, BioCypher facilitates the creation of task-specific subsets of databases to be shared alongside analyses.
Extensive automation reduces development time and file sizes, while additionally making the shared dataset independent of database software versions (see case studies “Network expansion”, “Subgraph extraction”, and “Embedding”).

4) Reusability and accessibility: Our template repository for a BioCypher pipeline with adapters, including a Docker Compose setup, is available [on GitHub](https://github.com/biocypher/project-template).
To enable learning by example, we curate existing pipelines as well as all adapters they use in a [GitHub project](https://github.com/orgs/biocypher/projects/3) that is tied to the BioCypher repository.
With these data, using the GitHub API and a pipeline based on our template, we build a BioCypher “meta-graph” for the simple browsing and analysis of existing BioCypher workflows (https://meta.biocypher.org/).
To inform the structure of this meta-graph, we have reactivated and now maintain the [Biomedical Resource Ontology](https://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/BRO/?p=summary) (BRO [@doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2010.10.003]), which allows the categorisation of pipelines and adapters (now [on GitHub](https://github.com/biocypher/biomedical-resource-ontology)).

While data FAIRness is a necessary part of open science communication, it is not sufficient for the adoption and sustainability of a software project such as BioCypher.
As such, we also implement measures based on the TRUST principles, to increase usability, accessibility, and extensibility of our framework.
For more information, see the following Supplementary Text on “Sustainable Development.”

### Sustainable Development

We have implemented numerous measures to increase the user-friendliness of our framework.
The BioCypher ecosystem is maintained centrally at https://github.com/biocypher, which includes projects for the management of development and the components of BioCypher pipelines (adapters and ontologies).
These projects serve as the ground truth for available BioCypher modules, and are used by a BioCypher pipeline (https://github.com/biocypher/meta-graph) to build an overview graph database that is automatically deployed to our server as a freely accessible Neo4j browser instance (at https://meta.biocypher.org, no login credentials required).
Prospective users can use the board and the graph to find examples and reusable components for their own KG.

We provide a template repository (https://github.com/biocypher/project-template) that guides new users through the process of deploying their own KG.
It includes a `docker compose` setup which can be used to execute the KG build step and automatically transfer the KG into a Neo4j database running in the official Neo4j Docker container, thus being automatically secure to deploy.

We provide a detailed tutorial for all aspects of BioCypher on our web page, https://biocypher.org, which we update regularly as new features are added.
We provide easy access to our community on that page, including email contact, a mailing list, and a community chat channel at https://biocypher.zulipchat.com.
We also explicitly encourage contributions and getting in contact, and we offer help through online or in-person seminars and meetings.
We provide community guidelines, a code of conduct, and a developer guide for contributing.
We participate in and organise hackathons to educate about knowledge representation and improve interoperability with other software ecosystems, such as Bioconductor and Galaxy.
